pages/pages-root-folder/index.md, before:

---
#
# Use the widgets beneath and the content will be
# inserted automagically in the webpage. To make
# this work, you have to use › layout: frontpage
#
layout: frontpage
header:
  title: Clhenrick
  image_fullwidth: unsplash_brooklyn-bridge_header.jpg
widget1:
  title: "Coding Blog"
  url: 'http://clhenrick.github.io'
  image: widget-1-302x182.jpg
  text: 'Every good portfolio website has a blog with fresh news, thoughts and develop&shy;ments of your activities. <em>Feeling Responsive</em> offers you a fully functional blog with an archive page to give readers a quick overview of all your posts.'
widget2:
  title: "Why use this theme?"
  url: 'http://phlow.github.io/feeling-responsive/info/'
  text: '<em>Feeling Responsive</em> is heavily customizable.<br/>1. Language-Support :)<br/>2. Optimized for speed and it&#39;s responsive.<br/>3. Built on <a href="http://foundation.zurb.com/">Foundation Framework</a>.<br/>4. Seven different Headers.<br/>5. Customizable navigation, footer,...'
  video: '<a href="#" data-reveal-id="videoModal"><img src="http://phlow.github.io/feeling-responsive/images/start-video-feeling-responsive-302x182.jpg" width="302" height="182" alt=""/></a>'
widget3:
  title: "Download Theme"
  url: 'https://github.com/Phlow/feeling-responsive'
  image: widget-github-303x182.jpg
  text: '<em>Feeling Responsive</em> is totally free and licensed under the MIT License. Make it your own and do with it what you want. Grab your copy or clone it at GitHub and start your website with it. Then tell me via Twitter <a href="http://twitter.com/phlow">@phlow</a>.'
permalink: /index.html
---

<div id="videoModal" class="reveal-modal large" data-reveal="">
  <div class="flex-video widescreen vimeo" style="display: block;">
    <iframe width="1280" height="720" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/3b5zCFSmVvU" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
  </div>
  <a class="close-reveal-modal">&#215;</a>
</div>

Commit message:

customize landing page and header

pages/pages-root-folder/index.md, after:

---
#
# Use the widgets beneath and the content will be
# inserted automagically in the webpage. To make
# this work, you have to use › layout: frontpage
#
layout: frontpage
header:
  title: clhenrick
  image_fullwidth: clhenrick-landing-header.jpg
widget1:
  title: "My Work"
  url: '/work/'
  text: '<strong>Encompasses:</strong> <br/>1. Data Visualizaton <br/>2. Web Development<br/>3. Cartographic Design<br/>4. Open Source GIS<br/>5. Data Wrangling'
widget2:
  title: "Coding Blog"
  url: '/blog/'
  text: 'My ramblings on previous projects and solving problems relating to the web, data, cartography, and design.' 
widget3:
  title: "Talk to me"
  url: '/contact/'
  text: 'Have a project idea you need to make a reality? Want advice on how to take your data and create aesthetically pleasing visualizations? Need a custom mapping solution? Or just want to say hello?'
permalink: /index.html
---

<div id="videoModal" class="reveal-modal large" data-reveal="">
  <div class="flex-video widescreen vimeo" style="display: block;">
    <iframe width="1280" height="720" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/3b5zCFSmVvU" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
  </div>
  <a class="close-reveal-modal">&#215;</a>
</div>
