pages/about.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: "about Chris Henrick"
subheadline: ""
teaser: ""
meta_description: "About Chris Henrick: Creative Technologist and Educator"
permalink: "/about/"
header: no
---

Chris Henrick is a Front-End Engineer and UX Designer who currently lives in Oakland, California who's work spans the domains of interactive (Geo) Data Visualization, Geographic Information Systems, and Cartographic Design. Most recently he was a team member of the University of California's [Geospatial Innovation Facility](http://gif.berkeley.edu) where he worked on web products such as [Cal-Adapt](https://cal-adapt.org) that help make climate data more accessible to the public and private sectors in regards to planning for the mitigation of climate change in California. Previously Chris has worked for [Google Cloud](https://cloud.google.com/) as a UX Engineer, [GreenInfo Network](http://greeninfo.org) as a full-stack Web Developer, and for [Stamen Design](http://stamen.com/about/) as a Design Technologist.

Chris is an alum of Parsons School of Design, The New School in New York City where he earned an [MFA in Design and Technology](http://www.newschool.edu/parsons/mfa-design-technology/). His thesis at MFA DT was a web app he conceptualized and coded called [Am I Rent Stabilized?](https://amirentstabilized.com) that seeks to solve the problem of NYC landlords lying to tenants about [rent-stabilization](http://www.nycrgb.org/html/resources/faq/rentstab.html#exactly) and illegally deregulating rent-stabilized apartments. You can learn more about it in an [article he wrote for Urban Omnibus](https://urbanomnibus.net/2015/05/using-open-data-to-strengthen-tenants-rights-activism/).

When not at work Chris enjoys bicycling, hiking, swimming, and playing percussion. Outside of his day to day work, he has assisted with organizing and facilitating [Maptime](https://maptime.io/), a community of professionals dedicated to creating a safe and welcoming space to educate non-experts about GIS, cartography, and interactive web mapping, free of charge.

### A few other sites of Chris Henrick
- [Cartography Portfolio](http://chrishenrick.com/)
- [MFA DT Thesis Blog](http://clhenrick.github.io/thesis-blog/)
- [MFA DT Experiments](https://chenrickmfadt.wordpress.com/)

Commit message:

Updated about/index page (#91)
* updated about/index:

- updated self description
- fixed heading usage
- updated page title & meta description

* minor edit to role description

* updated about/index page content

* updated about/index title & description again

pages/about.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: "about Chris Henrick"
subheadline: ""
teaser: ""
meta_description: "A short bio of Chris Henrick, front-end web developer and design engineer"
permalink: "/about/"
header: no
---

Chris Henrick is an [Oakland, California](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oakland,_California) based Senior Front-End Web Developer and Design Engineer who's work spans the domains of interactive (Geo) Data Visualization, Geographic Information Systems, and Cartographic Design. Chris currently works at [Esri](https://esri.com) on [Story Maps](https://storymaps.com), a web authoring tool that enables authors to create both long and short form interactive content, with or without maps. Prior to working at Esri he was a team member of the University of California's [Geospatial Innovation Facility](http://gif.berkeley.edu) where he worked on web applications such as [Cal-Adapt](https://cal-adapt.org) that help make climate data more accessible to the public and private sectors for the mitigation of climate change in California. Previously Chris has worked for [Google Cloud](https://cloud.google.com/) as a UX Engineer, [GreenInfo Network](http://greeninfo.org) as a full-stack Web Developer, and for [Stamen Design](http://stamen.com/about/) as a Design Technologist.

Chris is an alum of Parsons School of Design, The New School in New York City where he earned an [MFA in Design and Technology](http://www.newschool.edu/parsons/mfa-design-technology/). His thesis at MFA DT was a web app he conceptualized and coded called [Am I Rent Stabilized?](https://amirentstabilized.com) that seeks to solve the problem of NYC landlords lying to tenants about [rent-stabilization](http://www.nycrgb.org/html/resources/faq/rentstab.html#exactly) and illegally deregulating rent-stabilized apartments. You can learn more about it in an [article he wrote for Urban Omnibus](https://urbanomnibus.net/2015/05/using-open-data-to-strengthen-tenants-rights-activism/).

When not at work Chris enjoys bicycling, hiking, swimming, and playing the drum set in jazz combos. Outside of his day to day work, he has assisted with organizing and facilitating [Maptime](https://maptime.io/), a community of professionals dedicated to creating a safe and welcoming space to educate non-experts about GIS, cartography, and interactive web mapping, free of charge.

## A few other sites of Chris Henrick
- [Cartography Portfolio](http://chrishenrick.com/)
- [MFA DT Thesis Blog](http://clhenrick.github.io/thesis-blog/)
- [MFA DT Experiments](https://chenrickmfadt.wordpress.com/)
