pages/cv.md, before:

---
layout: page-fullwidth
show_meta: false
title: "Curriculum Vitae"
meta_description: "Curriculum Vitae or Résumé of Chris Henrick"
subheadline: ""
permalink: "/about/cv/"
header: no
---
[Download as a PDF]({{site.urlimg}}chris-henrick-resume.pdf)

##Professional Experience
-----

### Chris Henrick Cartography
**Web Developer, Cartographer**  
*June, 2010 - Present*  
San Francisco, CA

Five years of consulting for a diverse range of clients in web development, print cartography, and geospatial data analysis.

- [My work]({{site.url}}/work/) demonstrates expertise in creating custom web applications, data wrangling, spatial analysis with open-source GIS software, and producing clean, legible, and stylistically appropriate cartographic and map related products for both print and the web.

- Current and former clients include [Rebecca Solnit](http://rebeccasolnit.net/), [Stamen Design](http://stamen.com/), [Radish Lab](http://radishlab.com/), Pratt's [Spatial Analysis and Visualization Initiative](https://www.pratt.edu/pratt-research-and-centers/spatial-analysis-visualization-initiative/), [The Skyscraper Museum](http://skyscraper.org/), [The Oakland Museum of California](http://museumca.org/), and [Avalon Travel Publishing](http://avalontravelbooks.com/).

### Stamen Design
**Design Technologist**  
*March, 2016 - December, 2016*  
San Francisco, CA  

One part data wrangler, one part cartographer, and several parts web developer for [Stamen Design](http://stamen.com).

- Prototyped and built highly customized web applications with technologies such as AWS, Heroku, React, Redux, Leaflet, CARTO, and D3.

- Assisted with designing web map tiles / basemaps using data from OpenStreetMap and technologies such as PostGIS, CartoCSS, and Mapnik.

### Radish Lab
**Web Developer**  
*May, 2015 - April 2016*  
Brooklyn, NY  

Assisted [Radish Lab](http://radishlab.com/), a web and graphic design studio, with creating interactive data-visualizations and professionally designed web sites for non-profits and cultural institutions such as [MAS](http://mas.org/). Duties include agile front-end web-development using modern web technologies such as jQuery, Node.JS, D3.JS, Wordpress, CARTO, and Github.

### CARTO
**Geospatial Developer Intern**  
*March, 2014 - October, 2014*   
New York, NY

Assisted [CARTO](https://carto.com/) with improving their web-based geospatial visualization platform:

- Documented and resolved software related issues on GitHub.
- Assisted in improving CARTO's internal geocoder using PostgreSQL, PgSQL, PostGIS and open administrative geospatial data.
- Tested and documented Odyssey JS, an open-source javascript library for telling stories with maps.
- Crafted video tutorials for and held in person workshops on educating users about the CARTO platform.
- Contributed to technical documentation of the CARTO platform.

### Avalon Travel Publishing
**Lead Cartographer**  
*February, 2012 - May, 2013*  
Berkeley, CA  

Assisted [Avalon](http://avalontravelbooks.com/)'s in-house Cartography Studio with creating new maps and updating existing maps for printed and ebook travel guide series including titles such as [Moon Handbooks](http://moon.com/), [Rick Steve's](https://www.ricksteves.com/), and [Let's Go](http://www.letsgo.com/).

- Sourced, analyzed, & processed open geospatial data to create professional quality cartographic products.
- Edited and created up to 60 maps per book that conformed to Avalon’s brand, cartographic style, and layout standards.
- Converted legacy Macromedia Freehand files to a modern Adobe Illustrator file format standard.
- Designed and implemented a practical workflow for incorporating GIS data into map production through the use of MAPublisher, QGIS, and other open-source tools.
- Created a database schema to store geocoded Point of Interest data.
- Wrote Javascript to automate tasks in Adobe Illustrator with the Scriptographer plug-in.
- Designed and structured a spatial data file server.

### GreenInfo Network
**GIS Specialist / Cartographer Intern**  
*Summer, 2010 and Spring, 2011*  
San Francisco, CA

Assisted [GreenInfo Nework](http://www.greeninfo.org/) with its mission of providing quality and affordable GIS analysis and cartographic products to public interest groups and governmental organizations.

- Executed a historic & current habitat suitability analysis of the Black-Backed Woodpecker for the John Muir Foundation utilizing model builder with USGS Landfire, Land Cover, and public lands data.
- Utilized Arc Map 9.x / 10.x to assist in the production of confidential priority acquisition area series maps for Save the Redwoods League.
- Created 3 offset CMYK print maps for Sustainable Conservation's Partners in Restoration Program using ArcGIS and Adobe Illustrator.
- Updated and edited an atlas for Protect Wild California's conservation easements and land acquisitions.
- Contributed outreach to various California land trusts for the California Protected Areas Database (CPAD).

### Steve Spindler Cartography
**Cartographer Intern**  
*Fall, 2009*  
Philadelphia, PA

Aided cartographer [Steve Spindler](http://www.bikemap.com/) in creating production print maps for the Pennsylvania cross-state bicycle touring route S.

- Corresponded with Pennsylvania bicycling advocacy leaders on input to mapping the bicycling route.
- Utilized Google Maps, Earth, and Docs to perform research and KML point data acquisition relating to bicycle touring.

### The Delaware Valley Regional Planning Commission
**Planning Intern**  
*Spring, 2008*  
Philadelphia, PA

Assisted [DVRPC](http://www.dvrpc.org/)'s Office of Transit, Bicycle, and Pedestrian Planning in implementing projects related to transit, pedestrian, and bicycle planning in the greater metropolitan Philadelphia area. Participated in tasks such as survey field-work, road safety audits, data scrubbing and aggregation, bicycle route mapping, and power point presentations.

## Volunteer Experience:
-----

### Maptime NYC
**Co-Organizer**  
*January, 2013 - June, 2016*  
New York, NY  

Assisted with organizing and hosting the [Maptime New York City chapter](http://www.meetup.com/Maptime-NYC/). Maptime's goal is to create a safe space for non-experts to learn about GIS, cartography, and web-mapping.

### ASIAN Inc.
**GIS Specialist Volunteer**  
*November, 2009 - July, 2010*  
San Francisco, CA  

Performed spatial data analysis and visualization to support [ASIAN Inc](http://www.asianinc.org/)'s goals of improving economic and housing opportunities for low income Asian Americans in the San Francisco Bay Area.

Consulted with GreenInfo Network on best practices for GIS analysis and data visualization of census and in-house demographic data.

## Education:
-----

### Parsons, The New School For Design
**Master of Fine Art in Design and Technology.**  
New York, NY  
GPA 3.91

MFA Thesis: [Am I Rent Stabilized?](https:amirentstabilized.com), an interactive web-app about rent-stabilization in New York City.

Areas of focus in [MFA DT](http://www.newschool.edu/parsons/mfa-design-technology/) included interactive web-mapping, data-visualization, web development, user experience design, game design, interactive narrative, open-source GIS, and creative coding.

Taught front end web development as part of a 3 week intensive "bootcamp" to the incoming 2014 MFA DT class.

Taught a two day workshop on Node.JS and Bash to the incoming class of Parsons MS in Data Visualization class of 2015.

### U.C. Berkeley Extension
**Graphic Design Certificate Program**  
San Francisco, CA

Areas of concentration include graphic design and typography.

### Temple University
**Bachelor of Arts in Geography and Urban Studies.**  
Philadelphia, PA  
GPA 3.77, graduated Magna Cum Laude.  

Member of Gamma Theta Upsilon, National Honors Society for Geography.
Recipient of the Henry N. Michael Prize in Geography and Urban Studies.

### University of the Arts
**Fine Art: Print Making and Drawing**  
Philadelphia, PA  
GPA 3.49  

## Computer Skills:
-----

- Programming proficiency in Javascript, Python, Bash, & SQL  
- Version control via Git and Github  
- Front end web development with React, Redux, Sass, and Webpack  
- Data visualization via D3  
- Interactive maps and cartography with Leaflet  
- Cloud Computing via Heroku, Digital Ocean, AWS  
- Backend web development via Node.JS and Express
- Database management with PostgreSQL  
- Geospatial Information Systems using QGIS, PostGIS, GDAL, ESRI ArcGIS  
- CARTO platform, javascript library, & API's  
- MapBox platform, javascript library, & API's  
- Cartographic design using TileMill and CartoCSS  
- Adobe Software: Illustrator, Photoshop, and InDesign  
- MAPublisher (GIS & Cartography plug-in for Adobe Illustrator)

Commit message:

Update cv and resume with greeninfo #12

pages/cv.md, after:

---
layout: page-fullwidth
show_meta: false
title: "Curriculum Vitae"
meta_description: "Curriculum Vitae or Résumé of Chris Henrick"
subheadline: ""
permalink: "/about/cv/"
header: no
---
[Download as a PDF]({{site.urlimg}}chris-henrick-resume.pdf)

##Professional Experience
-----

### GreenInfo Network
**Web Developer**  
*February, 2017 - Present*  
Oakland, CA  

- Full stack web developer with [GreenInfo Network](http://greeninfo.org) specializing in building web applications that utilize geo-visualization with open source GIS and web-mapping software, Javascript, Python, SQL, and PHP.

- Coordinate with a team of GIS specialists, cartographers, designers, and project managers to produce responsive web applications for clients primarily working in the non-profit, NGO, and government sectors.

- Assisting Google with creating curated "Voyager" content for their 2017 relaunch of Google Earth.


### Chris Henrick Cartography
**Web Developer, Cartographer**  
*June, 2010 - Present*  
San Francisco, CA

Five years of consulting for a diverse range of clients in web development, print cartography, and geospatial data analysis.

- [My work]({{site.url}}/work/) demonstrates expertise in creating custom web applications, data wrangling, spatial analysis with open-source GIS software, and producing clean, legible, and stylistically appropriate cartographic and map related products for both print and the web.

- Current and former clients include [Rebecca Solnit](http://rebeccasolnit.net/), [Stamen Design](http://stamen.com/), [Radish Lab](http://radishlab.com/), Pratt's [Spatial Analysis and Visualization Initiative](https://www.pratt.edu/pratt-research-and-centers/spatial-analysis-visualization-initiative/), [The Skyscraper Museum](http://skyscraper.org/), [The Oakland Museum of California](http://museumca.org/), and [Avalon Travel Publishing](http://avalontravelbooks.com/).

### Stamen Design
**Design Technologist**  
*March, 2016 - December, 2016*  
San Francisco, CA  

One part data wrangler, one part cartographer, and several parts web developer for [Stamen Design](http://stamen.com).

- Prototyped and built highly customized web applications with technologies such as AWS, Heroku, React, Redux, Leaflet, CARTO, and D3.

- Assisted with designing web map tiles / basemaps using data from OpenStreetMap and technologies such as PostGIS, CartoCSS, and Mapnik.

### Radish Lab
**Web Developer**  
*May, 2015 - April 2016*  
Brooklyn, NY  

Assisted [Radish Lab](http://radishlab.com/), a web and graphic design studio, with creating interactive data-visualizations and professionally designed web sites for non-profits and cultural institutions such as [MAS](http://mas.org/). Duties include agile front-end web-development using modern web technologies such as jQuery, Node.JS, D3.JS, Wordpress, CARTO, and Github.

### CARTO
**Geospatial Developer Intern**  
*March, 2014 - October, 2014*   
New York, NY

Assisted [CARTO](https://carto.com/) with improving their web-based geospatial visualization platform:

- Documented and resolved software related issues on GitHub.
- Assisted in improving CARTO's internal geocoder using PostgreSQL, PgSQL, PostGIS and open administrative geospatial data.
- Tested and documented Odyssey JS, an open-source javascript library for telling stories with maps.
- Crafted video tutorials for and held in person workshops on educating users about the CARTO platform.
- Contributed to technical documentation of the CARTO platform.

### Avalon Travel Publishing
**Lead Cartographer**  
*February, 2012 - May, 2013*  
Berkeley, CA  

Assisted [Avalon](http://avalontravelbooks.com/)'s in-house Cartography Studio with creating new maps and updating existing maps for printed and ebook travel guide series including titles such as [Moon Handbooks](http://moon.com/), [Rick Steve's](https://www.ricksteves.com/), and [Let's Go](http://www.letsgo.com/).

- Sourced, analyzed, & processed open geospatial data to create professional quality cartographic products.
- Edited and created up to 60 maps per book that conformed to Avalon’s brand, cartographic style, and layout standards.
- Converted legacy Macromedia Freehand files to a modern Adobe Illustrator file format standard.
- Designed and implemented a practical workflow for incorporating GIS data into map production through the use of MAPublisher, QGIS, and other open-source tools.
- Created a database schema to store geocoded Point of Interest data.
- Wrote Javascript to automate tasks in Adobe Illustrator with the Scriptographer plug-in.
- Designed and structured a spatial data file server.

### GreenInfo Network
**GIS Specialist / Cartographer Intern**  
*Summer, 2010 and Spring, 2011*  
San Francisco, CA

Assisted [GreenInfo Nework](http://www.greeninfo.org/) with its mission of providing quality and affordable GIS analysis and cartographic products to public interest groups and governmental organizations.

- Executed a historic & current habitat suitability analysis of the Black-Backed Woodpecker for the John Muir Foundation utilizing model builder with USGS Landfire, Land Cover, and public lands data.
- Utilized Arc Map 9.x / 10.x to assist in the production of confidential priority acquisition area series maps for Save the Redwoods League.
- Created 3 offset CMYK print maps for Sustainable Conservation's Partners in Restoration Program using ArcGIS and Adobe Illustrator.
- Updated and edited an atlas for Protect Wild California's conservation easements and land acquisitions.
- Contributed outreach to various California land trusts for the California Protected Areas Database (CPAD).

### Steve Spindler Cartography
**Cartographer Intern**  
*Fall, 2009*  
Philadelphia, PA

Aided cartographer [Steve Spindler](http://www.bikemap.com/) in creating production print maps for the Pennsylvania cross-state bicycle touring route S.

- Corresponded with Pennsylvania bicycling advocacy leaders on input to mapping the bicycling route.
- Utilized Google Maps, Earth, and Docs to perform research and KML point data acquisition relating to bicycle touring.

### The Delaware Valley Regional Planning Commission
**Planning Intern**  
*Spring, 2008*  
Philadelphia, PA

Assisted [DVRPC](http://www.dvrpc.org/)'s Office of Transit, Bicycle, and Pedestrian Planning in implementing projects related to transit, pedestrian, and bicycle planning in the greater metropolitan Philadelphia area. Participated in tasks such as survey field-work, road safety audits, data scrubbing and aggregation, bicycle route mapping, and power point presentations.

## Volunteer Experience:
-----

### Maptime NYC
**Co-Organizer**  
*January, 2013 - June, 2016*  
New York, NY  

Assisted with organizing and hosting the [Maptime New York City chapter](http://www.meetup.com/Maptime-NYC/). Maptime's goal is to create a safe space for non-experts to learn about GIS, cartography, and web-mapping.

### ASIAN Inc.
**GIS Specialist Volunteer**  
*November, 2009 - July, 2010*  
San Francisco, CA  

Performed spatial data analysis and visualization to support [ASIAN Inc](http://www.asianinc.org/)'s goals of improving economic and housing opportunities for low income Asian Americans in the San Francisco Bay Area.

Consulted with GreenInfo Network on best practices for GIS analysis and data visualization of census and in-house demographic data.

## Education:
-----

### Parsons, The New School For Design
**Master of Fine Art in Design and Technology.**  
New York, NY  
GPA 3.91

MFA Thesis: [Am I Rent Stabilized?](https:amirentstabilized.com), an interactive web-app about rent-stabilization in New York City.

Areas of focus in [MFA DT](http://www.newschool.edu/parsons/mfa-design-technology/) included interactive web-mapping, data-visualization, web development, user experience design, game design, interactive narrative, open-source GIS, and creative coding.

Taught front end web development as part of a 3 week intensive "bootcamp" to the incoming 2014 MFA DT class.

Taught a two day workshop on Node.JS and Bash to the incoming class of Parsons MS in Data Visualization class of 2015.

### U.C. Berkeley Extension
**Graphic Design Certificate Program**  
San Francisco, CA

Areas of concentration include graphic design and typography.

### Temple University
**Bachelor of Arts in Geography and Urban Studies.**  
Philadelphia, PA  
GPA 3.77, graduated Magna Cum Laude.  

Member of Gamma Theta Upsilon, National Honors Society for Geography.
Recipient of the Henry N. Michael Prize in Geography and Urban Studies.

### University of the Arts
**Fine Art: Print Making and Drawing**  
Philadelphia, PA  
GPA 3.49  

## Computer Skills:
-----

- Programming proficiency in Javascript, Python, Bash, & SQL  
- Version control via Git and Github  
- Front end web development with React, Redux, Sass, and Webpack  
- Data visualization via D3  
- Interactive maps and cartography with Leaflet  
- Cloud Computing via Heroku, Digital Ocean, AWS  
- Backend web development via Node.JS and Express
- Database management with PostgreSQL  
- Geospatial Information Systems using QGIS, PostGIS, GDAL, ESRI ArcGIS  
- CARTO platform, javascript library, & API's  
- MapBox platform, javascript library, & API's  
- Cartographic design using TileMill and CartoCSS  
- Adobe Software: Illustrator, Photoshop, and InDesign  
- MAPublisher (GIS & Cartography plug-in for Adobe Illustrator)
